---
title: bits-and-pieces
published: false
---

# What's possible with Extempore? {#whats-possible-with-extempore}

## Real-time DSP {#real-time-dsp}

Make your own DSP signal chain. [Start
low-level](2012-06-07-dsp-basics-in-extempore.org) (with unit
generators, envelopes, LFOs, etc.) and [build whatever abstractions take
your fancy](2012-06-07-more-dsp-and-extempore-types.org). You can even
build Extempore 'instruments' which can be played like soft synths
(here's a simple and And because it's all dynamically compiled, if
things aren't working for you you can dig into the source and change
things on the fly :)

The `examples/core/audio_101.xtm` example file is a good place to start
for this sort of thing.

## Higher-level (note based) audio sequencing {#higher-level-note-based-audio-sequencing}

If writing raw bits to the sound card isn't your cup of tea, then
there's a '[instrument](2012-10-16-a-really-simple-instrument.org)'
(note-level) audio framework in Extempore as well. You can [load an
instrument](2012-10-17-loading-and-using-a-sampler.org), [trigger sounds
using the familiar pitch/velocity/duration
arguments](2012-10-15-playing-an-instrument-part-i.org), and build
[complex rhythmic and harmonic
patterns](2012-10-15-playing-an-instrument-part-ii.org) (this type of
musical coding will be [familiar to Impromptu
users](2012-10-15-extempore-for-impromptu-users.org)).

Apart from the aforelinked blog posts, the `examples/core/polysynth.xtm`
example file is a good place to start for this type of musical
interaction. There aren't a heap of preset instruments available
currently, but more will be added as development continues.

It's important to point out that there's nothing forcing you to choose
between these high-level and low-level music making approaches. Mixing
Scheme and xtlang code is the whole point of Extempore---so pick
whichever approach is the best fit for what you're trying to achieve.

## Graphics processing {#graphics-processing}

This 'philosophy' document doesn't cover it, but Extempore also has
support for working with graphics. Both 2D (via [nanovg]()) and 3D (via
[OpenGL](http://www.opengl.org)) graphics are supported, and again
everything can be tweaked on the fly.

There are a few OpenGL examples in `examples/external/` which might be
of interest for those who want to get started with graphics in
Extempore.

## Working with external C libraries {#working-with-external-c-libraries}

If there's a particular C library that you'd like to explore in a more
dynamic way than is possible with a statically compiled binary, then you
can [create xtlang bindings for the
library](2012-08-23-binding-to-c-libs.org), load it at runtime and away
you go. This could be used, for instance, to add OpenCV image processing
to a computer-vision based program, or to leverage GStreamer for
playback and remixing of video content in real-time.

If you've got the compiled library and the header file (so that you can
determine the types/function signatures of the library's functions), you
can bind it on the fly and add it into the live programming loop. Check
out the `libs/external` directory to see how it's done.

## And much moreâ€¦ {#and-much-more}

I'm sure you can think of a way to leverage Extempore that I haven't
even thought of :)

## How do I start? {#how-do-i-start}

Extempore works on [Windows
7](2013-03-20-building-extempore-on-windows.org), [OSX and
Linux](2013-03-20-building-extempore-on-osx-linux.org), and you can
[interact with the
compiler](2012-09-26-interacting-with-the-extempore-compiler.org) using
any client that can write strings to a TCP port. Having said that,
there's an [Emacs major
mode](2012-10-10-extempore-emacs-cheat-sheet.org), [a vim
plugin](2014-11-07-hacking-extempore-in-vim.org), and a [Sublime Text 2
plugin](2012-10-23-extempore-st2-cheat-sheet.org) in the `extras`
directory, which all make the programming/debugging experience a bit
nicer than echoing strings to a port using `netcat`. But hey, whatever
floats your boat.

There's [a bunch more documentation](../extempore-docs/index.org) on
this blog, as well as the project's [github project
page](https://github.com/digego/extempore). There are some examples in
the `examples` subdirectory which are a great way to start off. And
finally, because it's open source, if you really want to see how it
works you can examine the source for yourself :)
